DOCS-11426-aggregators-reference-kt (#1564)
mulesoft/docs-connectors: aggregators/1.0/modules/ROOT/pages/aggregators-module-reference.adoc

= Aggregators Module Reference 1.0 - Mule 4
:page-aliases: connectors::aggregator/aggregators-module-reference.adoc

> 

Reviewer: Instructions

Do not edit the sections:
RAISES error descriptions
Asynchronous versus Synchronous Aggregations
Aggregators in a Cluster
Considerations for Mule Apps using Aggregators
I’ll move those sections to their own topic pages.

Support Category: https://www.mulesoft.com/legal/versioning-back-support-policy#anypoint-connectors[Select]

Release Notes: xref:release-notes::connector/aggregators-module-release-notes.adoc[Aggregators Module Release Notes]

> An aggregator scope is a component that receives some data, processes the data to extract some value, and then adds that value to a list of aggregated elements. After that process is complete, and depending on the aggregator scope configuration, a set of components in the flow process the list of elements.

Reviewer: "a set...processes"
```suggestion
An _aggregator scope_ is a component that receives some data, processes the data to extract some value, and then adds that value to a list of aggregated elements. After that process is complete, and depending on the aggregator scope configuration, a set of components in the flow processes the list of elements.
```

Aggregators are pass-through routers. The same data that an aggregator scope receives is processed by the components that follow the aggregator scope. 

> The only modifications are the propagation of variables in case any are set while executing any of the aggregation routes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The only modification is variable propagation if any variables are set during the execution of any of the aggregation routes.
```

When an aggregator scope releases the stored values, a route component (*Incremental aggregation* or *Aggregation complete*) processes the list of aggregated elements within the aggregator scope itself or in another Mule flow, through an *Aggregator listener* source. The process depends on the configuration of the aggregator scope used.

== Configurations

> There is no global configuration for the Aggregator Module because the module uses scopes. Each type of aggregator is a different scope that is configurable through its parameters. The following parameters are common in each scope:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is no global configuration for the Aggregator Module because the module uses scopes. Each type of aggregator is a different scope that is configurable through its parameters. The following parameters are common in each scope:
```

* Content
+

> The expression that defines what to aggregate. The result of the evaluation is the value stored in the aggregation. Because all data related to an aggregator scope is stored in an object store, the content value must be serializable. Otherwise, there is no assurance that the module will work properly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The expression that defines what to aggregate. The result of the evaluation is the value stored in the aggregation. Because all data related to an aggregator scope is stored in an object store, the content value must be serializable. Otherwise, the module might not work properly.
```

* Object Store
+
All information related to an aggregator is stored in an object store. The type of object store relates to the expected behavior of the component.

** Persistent Object Store (Default)
+

> Slower but more reliable. Enables data recovery after the application restarts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Slower but more reliable than an in-memory object store. Enables data recovery after the application restarts.
```

** In-Memory Object Store
+

> Faster but loses all the data if the application restarts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Faster than a persistent memory store, but loses all the data if the application restarts.
```

== Aggregators Scopes

There are size-based, time-based, and group-based aggregators.

[[size-based-aggregator]]
=== Size-Based Aggregator

> The *Size based aggregator* scope enables you to aggregate elements until a predefined size number of elements completes the aggregation, executing the routes and listeners.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The *Size based aggregator* scope enables you to aggregate elements until a predefined number of elements completes the aggregation, executing the routes and listeners.
```

</aggregators:size-based-aggregator>
----

If the elements reach the *Max size* specified, two things occur:

> * The elements in the storage are removed and the next element will belong to the new aggregation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The elements in the storage are removed and the next element belongs to the new aggregation.
```

* The *Aggregation complete* route executes with the aggregated elements.

> Additionally, if an *Aggregator listener* is registered to the aggregator scope, the listener's callback executes with the same set of elements. +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, if an *Aggregator listener* is registered to the aggregator scope, the listener's callback executes using the same set of elements. +
```

If the *Incremental aggregation* route is not null, and the *Max size* is not reached, then the route component chain executes with all the aggregated elements, including the last element aggregated.

> You can also define a *Timeout* for the aggregator scope. In that case, a scheduled task with that timeout as a delay is registered for execution. The time is computed from the time at which the first element arrives and no extra task is scheduled if there is another task waiting to be executed. In the case of a timeout, the referenced listener executes only if it supports being called by timeout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also define a *Timeout* for the aggregator scope. In that case, a scheduled task with that timeout as a delay is registered for execution. The time is computed from the time at which the first element arrives, and no extra task is scheduled if there is another task waiting to be executed. In the case of a timeout, the referenced listener executes only if it supports being called by timeout.
```

==== Parameters

[%header%autowidth.spread]
|===
| Name | Type | Description | Default Value | Required
| Name | String | The name of the aggregator. An aggregator listener can later reference the scope by name. || x
| Content | Expression | The expression that defines what to aggregate. The result of the evaluation is the value stored in the aggregation. | #[payload] |
| Max Size | Number | The total number of elements to aggregate before considering the aggregation complete. | | x

> | Timeout | Number |  A maximum time to wait for the aggregation to complete. If the timeout is reached before the total number of elements is equal to Max Size, the aggregation is not considered complete. A value of `0` is not supported to avoid timing out the group constantly. | -1(UNLIMITED) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Timeout | Number |  A maximum time to wait for the aggregation to complete. If the timeout is reached before the total number of elements is equal to Max Size, the aggregation is not considered complete. A value of `0` is not supported, to avoid constant group timeouts. | -1(UNLIMITED) |
```

| Timeout unit | Time Unit | The time unit in which to measure the timeout. |  SECONDS |
| Object Store | Object Store |  Either a name to reference a global object store or a definition of a private object store where the aggregated elements will be stored. |  Default Object Store partition. |
| Aggregation Complete Route | Route | Components chain to execute once the aggregation is complete. The Aggregation Complete Route does not execute if the timeout is reached. | | x

> | Incremental Aggregation Route | Route | Components chain to execute for every new element that is aggregated. The payload is the list of all the elements that have been aggregated in the aggregation from the first element to the one that is currently aggregated. | |

Reviewer: Is "chain" a noun here? I wonder if this is more clear:
```suggestion
| Incremental Aggregation Route | Route | A chain of components chain to execute for every new element that is aggregated. The payload is the list of all the elements that have been aggregated in the aggregation from the first element to the one that is currently aggregated. | |
```

|===

> ==== Raises

Reviewer: Do not edit

* AGGREGATORS:AGGREGATOR_CONFIG

The Max size or Timeout fields have invalid values, for example, `maxSize < 0`.

* AGGREGATORS:OBJECT_STORE_ACCESS

An error occurred during an attempt to access the object store used to store the aggregated values.

[[time-based-aggregator]]
=== Time-Based Aggregator

> The *Time based aggregator* scope enables you to aggregate elements until a time period completes, executing the routes and listeners.

Reviewer: Misuse of "complete" (style ref):
```suggestion
The *Time based aggregator* scope enables you to aggregate elements until a specified time limit is reached, executing the routes and listeners.
```

> The *Time based aggregator* scope enables you to aggregate elements until a specified time limit is reached, executing the routes and listeners.

Reviewer 2: ... until a specified time limit is reached when executing the routes and listeners?

</aggregators:time-based-aggregator>
----

The period taken into account is computed from the time the first element arrives. After the aggregation is released, the timer does not start until the next element arrives. 

> The aggregator also enables an *Incremental aggregation* route to be executed every time a new element arrives, unless a *Max size* is set.
> 
> If that is the case, the *Incremental aggregation* route executes every time except when the size of the aggregated elements is equal to the *Max size*. If an *Aggregator listener* is present at that moment, the listener callback is also executed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The aggregator also enables an *Incremental aggregation* route to be executed every time a new element arrives, unless a *Max size* is set. If that is the case, the *Incremental aggregation* route executes every time except when the size of the aggregated elements is equal to *Max size*. If an *Aggregator listener* is present at that moment, the listener callback is also executed.
```

==== Parameters

[%header%autowidth.spread]
|===
| Name | Type | Description | Default Value | Required
| Name | String | The name of the aggregator. An aggregator listener can later reference the scope by name. || x
| Content | Expression | The expression that defines what to aggregate. The result of the evaluation is the value stored in the aggregation. | #[payload] |
| Period | Number |  A time period to wait before considering the aggregation complete. | | x
| Period unit | Time Unit | The time unit in which to measure the time period. |  SECONDS |
| Max Size | Number | The total number of elements to aggregate before considering the aggregation complete. | -1(UNLIMITED) |
| Object Store | Object Store |  Either a name to reference a global object store or a definition of a private object store where the aggregated elements will be stored. |  Default Object Store partition. |

> | Incremental Aggregation Route | Route | Components chain to execute for every new element that is aggregated. The payload is the list of all the elements that have been aggregated in the aggregation from the first element to the one that is currently aggregated. | |

Reviewer: ditto comment about Line 84

|===

> ==== Raises

Reviewer: Do not edit.

</aggregators:group-based-aggregator>
----

If the elements reach the *Max size* specified for the group, two things occur:

> * The elements in that group are removed from the storage. The group is marked as complete and every new element that arrives to that group will raise an exception.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The elements in that group are removed from storage. The group is marked as complete and every new element that arrives at that group raises an exception.
```

* The *Aggregation complete* route executes with the aggregated elements of that particular group.

Every time a new element reaches the aggregator, an ID is resolved. If a group with that ID already exists in the aggregator, the value is added to that group. Otherwise, a new group with that ID is created and the received element is the first element in that group's aggregation.

Additionally, if an *Aggregator listener* is registered to the aggregator scope, the listener's callback executes with the same set of elements. +
If the *Incremental aggregation* route is not null, and the *Max size* is not reached, then the route component chain executes with all the aggregated elements, including the last element aggregated.

> Some important concepts appear with the *Group based aggregator* scope:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The *Group based aggregator* scope introduces some important concepts:
```

* Group timeout +

> When a group has to be released because all the necessary elements for the group did not arrive within the expected time. If a group has timed out but is not yet evicted, it will reject attempts to add any new values to that group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Specifies when a group must be released because all the necessary elements for the group did not arrive within the expected time. If a group has timed out but is not yet evicted, it rejects attempts to add any new values.
```

* Group eviction +

> When a group is removed from the aggregator, regardless of whether it was completed or timed out. If a new element with that group's ID is received by the aggregator, the group will be created again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Specifies when a group is removed from the aggregator, regardless of whether it was completed or timed out. If a new element with that group's ID is received by the aggregator, the group is created again.
```

> Lastly, when elements that reach group-based aggregators come from a sequence that is splitted (by a xref:mule-runtime::for-each-scope-concept.adoc[ForEach] component for example), each elements gets assigned a different `sequenceNumber`. In that case, the elements are sorted in increasing order prior to the aggregation release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lastly, when elements that reach group-based aggregators come from a sequence that is split (by a xref:mule-runtime::for-each-scope-concept.adoc[ForEach] component for example), each element is assigned a different `sequenceNumber`. In that case, the elements are sorted in increasing order prior to the aggregation release.
```

> ==== Parameters

Reviewer: Break here to commit partial

[%header%autowidth.spread]
|===
| Name | Type | Description | Default Value | Required

> | Name | String | The name of the aggregator. n aggregator listener can later reference the scope by name. || x

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Name | String | The name of the aggregator. An aggregator listener can later reference the scope by name. || x
```

| Content | Expression | The expression that defines what to aggregate. The result of the evaluation is the value stored in the aggregation. | #[payload] |

> | Group Id | Expression | The expression to evaluate for every new message received in order to get the ID for the group where it should be aggregated. | #[correlationId] |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Group Id | Expression | The expression to evaluate for every new message received to obtain the ID for the group in which it should be aggregated. | #[correlationId] |
```

> | Group Size | Number | The maximum size to assign to the group with the group ID resolved. All messages with the same group ID must have the same group size. If not, only the first resolved group size is considered correct. A warning is logged for every one that does not match it. | #[itemSequenceInfo.sequenceSize] |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Group Size | Number | The maximum size to assign to the group with the group ID resolved. All messages with the same group ID must have the same group size. If not, only the first resolved group size is considered correct. A warning is logged for every group size that does not match. | #[itemSequenceInfo.sequenceSize] |
```

> | Eviction Time | Number | The time to remember a group ID once it is completed or timed out (0 means: don't remember, -1: remember forever) | 180 |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Eviction Time | Number | The time to remember a group ID after it is completed or timed out (0 means: don't remember, -1: remember forever). | 180 |
```

Reviewer: But...is it correct to say that a group ID is "completed" or "timed out"? How is an ID complete or timed out?
Do we mean that the group ID is either no longer used or expired?

| Eviction Time Unit | Time Unit | The time unit for the Eviction Time. | SECONDS |

> | Timeout | Number |  A maximum time to wait for the aggregation of a group to complete. If the timeout is reached before the total number of elements in that group is equal to the group's size, the aggregation is considered complete. To avoid constant group timeouts, a value of `0` is not supported. | -1(UNLIMITED) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Timeout | Number |  The maximum time to wait for the aggregation of a group to complete. If the timeout is reached before the total number of elements in that group is equal to the group's size, the aggregation is considered complete. To avoid constant group timeouts, a value of `0` is not supported. | -1(UNLIMITED) |
```

| Timeout unit | Time Unit | The time unit in which to measure the timeout. |  SECONDS |
| Object Store | Object Store |  Either a name to reference a global object store or a definition of a private object store where the aggregated elements are stored. |  Default Object Store partition |
| Aggregation Complete Route | Route |  Components chain to execute once the aggregation is complete. | | x

> | Incremental Aggregation Route | Route | Components chain to execute for every new element that is aggregated. The payload is the list of all the elements that have been aggregated in the aggregation from the first element to the one that is currently aggregated. | |

Reviewer: ditto previous edits to this description

|===

> ==== Raises

Reviewer: Do not edit.

* AGGREGATORS:GROUP_COMPLETED

An error occurred during an attempt to add a new element to an already completed group that was not yet evicted.

* AGGREGATORS:GROUP_TIMED_OUT

An error occurred during an attempt to add a new element to a group that timed out but had not yet been evicted.

* AGGREGATORS:NO_GROUP_ID

The expression that resolves to the group ID returns null.

* AGGREGATORS:NO_GROUP_SIZE

The expression that resolves to the group size returns null.

* AGGREGATORS:AGGREGATOR_CONFIG

The Group size or Timeout fields have invalid values, for example, groupSize < 0.

* AGGREGATORS:OBJECT_STORE_ACCESS

An error occurred during an attempt to access the object store used to store the aggregated values.

== Sources

[[aggregator-listener]]
=== Aggregator Listener

An *Aggregator listener* is a source for listening to elements triggered by an aggregator scope.

`<aggregators:aggregator-listener aggregatorName="exampleAggregator" includeTimedOutGroups="false">`

[IMPORTANT]

> An Aggregator listener references only aggregator scopes that are inside a flow. Aggregator scopes declared in a sub-flow are not visible to Aggregator listeners.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An Aggregator listener references only aggregator scopes that are inside a flow. Aggregator scopes declared in a subflow are not visible to Aggregator listeners.
```

> Once the aggregator scope referenced by the listener completes an aggregation, the listener is triggered with a list of all the elements. +

Reviewer: GLOBAL, to ease translation, replace "once" with "after" if that is what you mean:
```suggestion
After the aggregator scope referenced by the listener completes an aggregation, the listener is triggered with a list of all the elements. +
```

> Because the *Aggregator listener* is a source, it is located in a different flow than the aggregator. The listener cannot access the context from the aggregator's flow, and therefore, cannot access the flow's variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because the *Aggregator listener* is a source, it is located in a different flow than the aggregator. The listener cannot access the context from the aggregator's flow, and therefore cannot access the flow's variables.
```

> Though you can use aggregation listeners for any kind of aggregator, it is important for time-driven async aggregations. Such aggregations are triggered asynchronously, so they do not execute an aggregator route and can only reach components in flows with an aggregator listener as the source.

Reviewer: GLOBAL, "though" > "although"
Reworded to avoid repetition about async aggregations.
```suggestion
Although you can use aggregation listeners for any kind of aggregator, it is important for time-driven asynchronous aggregations, which do not execute an aggregator route and can reach components only in flows with an aggregator listener as the source.
```

==== Parameters

[%header%autowidth.spread]
|===
| Name | Type | Description | Default Value | Required

> | Aggregator Name | String | The name of the aggregator to listen to. Once that aggregator releases its elements, the listener is executed. Each listener can only reference one aggregator, and each aggregator can only be referenced by at most one listener. | | x

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Aggregator Name | String | The name of the aggregator to listen to. After that aggregator releases its elements, the listener is executed. Each listener can reference only one aggregator, and each aggregator can be referenced by at most one listener. | | x
```

| Include Timed Out Groups | Boolean | Indicates whether the listener should be triggered when a group is released due to a timeout. | false |
|===

== Aggregation Attributes

Each time a message goes through an aggregation, some attributes with information about the aggregation are added to the message.

[%header%autowidth.spread]
|===
| Name | Type | Description

> | Aggregation ID | String | The ID from the group where the element is aggregated. If the aggregation strategy does not aggregate by group, this field will be an autogenerated value that is kept until the aggregation is released (as with group-based and time-based aggregators).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Aggregation ID | String | The ID from the group in which the element is aggregated. If the aggregation strategy does not aggregate by group, this field is an autogenerated value that is kept until the aggregation is released (as with group-based and time-based aggregators).
```

| First Item Arrival Time | Date | The time when the first value is aggregated.
| Last Item Arrival Time | Date | The time when the last value is aggregated.
| Is Aggregation Complete | Boolean | True if the aggregation is complete, False otherwise.
|===

> == Synchronous versus Asynchronous Aggregations

Reviewer: Do not edit.

> An aggregation is complete based on a new element added to the list, as when a Max size is specified, or because some timeout or time period is complete. This is important because the type of aggregation determines which chain of components to execute with the list of elements.

Reviewer: Is "Max size" syntax? If so, format; if not, consider "maximum size":
```suggestion
An aggregation is considered complete either when a new element is added to the list (such as when a maximum size is specified) or when a specified timeout occurs or time period is complete. This is important because the type of aggregation determines which chain of components to execute with the list of elements.
```

There are two kinds of triggers for an aggregation completion: synchronous and asynchronous.

[IMPORTANT]
Each time counter associated with an aggregator starts counting from the moment the first message of a group arrives. Once the aggregation is complete, the counter resets and waits for the next element to arrive. +
For single-group aggregators (time-based and size-based aggregators), there is only one time counter, but for the group-based aggregator, there is one counter per group.

=== Synchronous Aggregations

> For aggregations completed because a new element arrives (Sync), at least one of the following things occur:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For aggregations completed by the arrival of a new element (Sync), at least one of the following things occurs:
```

* If the aggregator scope is configured with an *Aggregation complete* route, the components inside that route execute with the payload being the list of aggregated elements. +
* If the aggregator scope has a referenced *Aggregator listener*, the flow to which that listener belongs executes with the payload being the list of aggregated elements.

=== Asynchronous Aggregations

> For aggregations completed due to a time period or timeout being reached (Async), the only thing that can happen is that if the aggregator scope has a referenced *Aggregator listener*, and the listener accepts timed-out aggregations, the flow which that listener belongs executes with the payload being the list of aggregated elements. +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For aggregations completed due to a time period or timeout being reached (Async), the only thing that can happen is that if the aggregator scope has a referenced *Aggregator listener*, and the listener accepts timed-out aggregations, the flow containing that listener executes with the payload being the list of aggregated elements. +
```

> == Considerations for Mule Apps using Aggregators

Reviewer: Do not edit BUT
```suggestion
== Considerations for Mule Apps Using Aggregators
```

When you create a Mule app that uses aggregators, consider the following points:

* If the aggregation depends on time, add the processing logic in a different flow with an *Aggregation listener* as a source.
* If the aggregation depends on a size being reached, add the processing logic in the *Aggregation complete* route.
* If the aggregation depends on both time and size, a good approach is to:
** Add the main logic in a sub-flow with no source. The *Is aggregation complete* attribute shows how the aggregation ended.
** Add a Flow Reference component to the main logic flow in the *Aggregation complete* route. If the sub-flow is executed by this flow reference, then the *Is aggregation complete* attribute is true.
** Add another flow with an *Aggregation listener* that listens to the aggregator and accepts timed-out groups. The listener should be followed by a Flow Reference component that calls the main logic sub-flow. In this case, the *Is aggregation complete* attribute is false.

> == Aggregators in a Cluster

Reviewer: Do not edit.
